=head1 NAME

cwb-align - A simple sentence alignment program for CWB-encoded corpora

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-align> [-vh] [-r I<registry_dir>] [-s I<x>] [-w I<n>]
    [-P I<attribute>] [-S I<attribute> | -V I<attribute>]
    -o I<filename> I<source_corpus> I<target_corpus> I<grid_attribute>
    [-C:I<weight>] [-S:I<weight>:I<ratio>] [-W:I<weight>:I<file>]
    [-1:I<weight>] [-2:I<weight>] [-3:I<weight>] [-4:I<weight>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<TODO> GEnerally what prog does and how it does it.

B<cwb-align> is called as follows: first the command line options, if any, are specified;
then the three compulsory arguments (I<source_corpus>, I<target_corpus>, I<grid_attribute>) are given; 
finally, configuration flags are added after the arguments

I<source_corpus> is the name of the source corpus, I<target_corpus> the name of the target corpus, 
and I<grid_attribute> the s-attribute used as the alignment grid. It is important to note that
the s-attribute specified for use as the grid attribute must exist, and must have the same name, 
in both the source AND target corpora).

The possible options and configuration flag are specified in the following two sections.

B<cwb-align-show> will look for the two aligned corpora in the registry directory, as usual. If a registry
location is not specified with the B<-r> option, then either a directory specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY
environment variable, or CWB's built-in default registry will be used.



=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that no CWB programs currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.

  -S <s-att> 
  -V <s-att> pre-alignment with ID matching (identical annotation strings)

  -s <x>     

=over 4

=item B<-h>

Displays B<cwb-align>'s help message, with short information about the usage of the command line options.  
This usage message will be also shown if B<cwb-align> is called with invalid options.
After the usage message is printed, B<cwb-align-show> will exit.

=item B<-o> I<filename>

Specifies the filename to which the program's output should be written. If this option is not used,
then the default destination file C<out.align> is used. 

=item B<-P> I<attribute>

Specified the p-attribute whose content should be analysed to establish the alignment. 
By default, the C<word> attribute is analysed.

=item B<-r> I<registry_dir>

Specifies that the registry files for the two aligned corpora are located in I<registry_dir>,
instead of the standard registry. If this option is not specified, then a directory 
specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable will be used; if that is not available, 
the built-in CWB default will be used.

=item B<-s> I<x>

set 2:2 alignment split factor to <x>      [1.2]

=item B<-S> I<attribute>

pre-alignment (corresponding regions of the s-attribute are pre-aligned; regions must appear in identical order!)

Please note that only one of B<-S> and B<-V> may be specfied (since it makes no sense for there to be 
I<both> types of pre-alignment). 

=item B<-v>

Activates verbose mode. In this mode, progress information is printed on standard output in the course
of the calculation of the alignment.

TODO

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION FLAGS

  -C:<w>     size of alignment region (in characters)
  -S:<w>:<t> shared words, i.e. identical tokens in source/target corpus
             [to avoid false friends, frequency ratios f1/(f1+f2) and
              f2/(f1+f2) must be greater than threshold <t>]
  -1:<w>     charcters shared by source and target region
  -2:<w>     bigrams     ~    ~    ~     ~    ~      ~   
  -3:<w>     trigrams    ~    ~    ~     ~    ~      ~   
  -4:<w>     4-grams     ~    ~    ~     ~    ~      ~   
             [N-gram features are similar to orthographic cognates]
  -W:<w>:<f> list of translation equivalents (read from file <f>)
             [format: <source word> SPC <target word>]
  [each flag defines a set of features with weight <w> per feature]

=over 4

=item B<TODO>

=back

The default configuration (if no flags are specified) is
C<< S<-C:1 -S:50:0.4 -3:3 -4:4> >>.


=head1 OUTPUT FORMAT

B<TODO>


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cqpserver>, L<cwb-align-encode>, L<cwb-align-show>, L<cwb-atoi>, L<cwb-compress-rdx>, 
L<cwb-config>, L<cwb-decode-nqrfile>, L<cwb-decode>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>, L<cwb-encode>, L<cwb-huffcode>, 
L<cwb-itoa>, L<cwb-lexdecode>, L<cwb-makeall>, L<cwb-scan-corpus>, L<cwb-s-decode>, L<cwb-s-encode>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

=over 4

=item
B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

=item
Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

=item
Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

=back

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

